which is now let's bring you this
English professor at the City University
of New York Graduate Center and economic
columnist for The New York Times Paul
Krugman he of course is the recipient of
the 2008 Nobel Prize in Economics out
something that Willie and I never have
gotten out now we can tell you about dog
yet track racing though also author of
the new book arguing with zombies I'm
one of those economics politics and the
fight for a better future
professor thank you so much for being
with us we greatly appreciate it
Marya lee excited to have your input on
how how you think we get through this
we've had some of the best medical
thinkers in the world talking about how
we thread the needle health-wise how do
we do that when it comes to an economy
where so many Americans are hurting and
so many more are going to be facing
tough times in the years and months
ahead well at this point I mean it does
not look as best I can make out from the
epidemiology it does not look as if we
are in a position to really fully reopen
get anywhere close to fully reopen in
this very we really have to maintain
I've been saying that the economy is in
kind of a medically-induced coma we have
to shut down a bunch of functions to
give the patient a chance to recover and
that's going to go on for some time that
does not have to be associated with
extreme hardship a lot of people have
lost their incomes but we can make up a
lot of that in fact some of the
legislation that Congress has already
passed does that we have on paper we
have greatly enhanced unemployment
benefits enough to make sure that that
workers who have lost their jobs because
of the coronavirus are not an extreme
financial hardship we have a small
business lending program that is
supposed to be helping businesses
survive what we have now is really there
are two things we have huge problems of
implementation we have this briefly
relief programs which are the right
thing to do but a lot of the money is
just not making its way through
it's being run through state
unemployment officers that are
completely overwhelmed they just are not
able to have the load in many cases they
were sort of designed to deny
unemployment benefits and so they're not
ready to deal with situations where
that's not what you want to be doing and
the small business program has been kind
of a disaster it's it's been allocated
in such a way that that lots of
companies that should be getting relief
are not getting it and many who
shouldn't are getting it and so you know
and then we state local governments are
facing a huge fiscal crisis so we know
what to do we could we can live I mean
we can live with a an economy that is
partially shut down for an extended
period of time but only if we make life
tolerable for those who basically
workers can't work for the time being so
you know we had a discussion a few days
ago on the phone for a few minutes and
you brought up a fascinating point and
it happened that we were talking about
this at the same time that Mitch
McConnell and Governor Cuomo were having
this back and forth about what states
give more what states take more but you
actually say that when you look at the
state and the local government suffering
you fear that it's going to not be the
states like New York and Connecticut New
Jersey in California who get a lot of
their money from income tax but you
actually fear that red states states
like Florida that don't have the state
income tax you are going to be the ones
who suffer the most could you explain
why yeah so that's let's take a think
about who's mean there we're still
trying to you know make estimates and
there's a lot of detail of too much
detail in all of this but if you ask who
is who is still whole who is who is not
actually suffering financially from this
it tends to be well-paid white collar
workers who can work from home it tends
to be people who are pay a lot of the
income tax in this country and states
lights if you look at the four four
biggest states in America two of blue
states two are red states California and
New York are both heavily dependent upon
income tax revenue and a lot of that
money's going to keep coming in because
people like me and and work from home
are still drawing a salary are doing
fine
the Florida and Texas rely almost
entirely on sales taxes and as we know
we just got the report yesterday
consumer spending has fallen off a cliff
and that means a drastic reduction in
sales tax revenue so it's quite possible
anyone who thinks that that you know the
fiscal crises are because states were
irresponsible that's you know we can we
can argue back and forth about all that
but the any rainy day fund that anybody
established is trivial rounding error
compared with the scale of this crisis
nobody could have been prepared for it
and if you actually ask who's going to
suffer the biggest declines in revenue
it may well it'll certainly will include
a number of states that are our red
states are Republican and may well
actually be worse in some of the red
states than it is and in some of the
high you know high white-collar
employment blue states professor Krugman
it's willie geist good to have you on
this morning you've looked at all the
data that we've seen publicly the first
quarter the economy contracted almost 5%
that will be much bigger yeah of course
in the second quarter we saw new jobless
claims yesterday at three point eight
five million 30 million jobless claims
over the last six weeks as you look out
over the horizon what begins to sort of
support this momentum if you want to
call it that toward massive unemployment
and massive contraction in the economy
where the hopeful signs over the horizon
well first of all the the good news is
that the stuff are we think most of the
jobs are really not a conventional
recession most of them is this it's
social distancing it's this induced coma
and we are seeing only a few signs of
it's spilling over to the broader
economy we came very close in March to a
financial crisis which would have been
that absolute disaster that would have
been Great Depression but the Federal
Reserve threw a lot of money at the
markets and stabilized that so that's
actually kind of okay
on that front and we have we aren't
doing a lot of relief it's not remotely
enough but what all of this unemployment
benefits small business lending it's not
going to bring back jobs and in lockdown
sectors of the economy but it is going
to limit the job losses more broadly now
I think we're we're you know almost
surely headed for an unemployment rate
close to 20 percent maybe above and
that's that is great depression level
unemployment that's that's that's
comparable to the worst years the Great
Depression but it's it does not look at
the moment like it's going to spiral
into a complete collapse the problem is
it's at the moment it's it's extremely
extremely painful for people who have
lost their incomes professor let's talk
about your book arguing with zombies and
and and and talk about what the purpose
of this book is and and what you hope
people will get out of it okay that's is
the book is a it's a some new material a
lot of things I've written over the
years but it all is telling the story if
you look at American politics look at
the debates mostly about economic policy
though there are some other issues I
deal with yeah we'd like to imagine our
civics textbooks tell us that we have
serious discussion of ideas people have
different views people may have
different values but we do have a good
faith discussion and we make a decision
based upon what what we think how the
world works unfortunately that's not
what happens in America in the year 2020
most of our debate is between defensible
ideas and things that we know are false
the ideas that should have been killed
by evidence but still keep on shambling
along eating our brains which is why are
called of zombies so the idea that tax
cuts pay for themselves that's been
tested to destruction
many many times it never works and yet
it remains the reigning orthodoxy in the
Republican Party the idea that
running budget deficits in a depressed
economy is going to lead to disaster and
hyperinflation we saw you know that was
there are a lot of people who were
predicting that 10 years ago it didn't
happen they seemed to have learned
nothing and you have an amazing amount
of the mail I get a lot is people saying
aren't we about to have a hyperinflation
and the answer is no we know that's a
that's a zombie idea that's something
that is not not true so and I think I
thought it was important to have a book
that says look to be honest with with
our readers to be honest with the public
it's not just enough to say here's the
way the here's what works here's what's
right but also to acknowledge the
reality of our political discourse which
is not healthy we're in many cases the
the main debates are not with good faith
people who are arguing based on the
evidence but with people who are just
clinging to these ideas that for
whatever a reason
financial gain ideology they insist on
on repeating even though we know that
they're not true
so I've been one of those zombies on the
deficit and the debt I've been very
concerned about it for 25 years and been
been concerned and been repeating that
the United States is going to have a
hard time absorbing a ten trillion
dollar national debt 15 where 23
trillion we're going to go no telling
how high we're going to go up I'm still
concerned about that if you could
explain one way should not be concerned
about that
but also I just I just want to push you
a little bit like you probably push
students in your class and just ask is
there a number is there a percentage of
our GDP that we could approach that that
would be a problem and let's go ahead
and assume as you talked about in a
recent column that we're running
basically at 0% interest so that
certainly gives us for more latitude
than say if interest rates were 10 or
12% is there an upper ceiling that that
our policymakers that you would warn or
policymakers
against going to is in terms of a
percentage of America's GDP okay so the
first point is well as you just said you
know we're able to borrow money at
extremely low interest rates so if you
ask what is the future burden on the
budget that will be created by the
borrowing we're doing now the answer is
it'll be negligible it'll be a rounding
error in the budget it's just not going
to matter and so that the headline debt
number will be gigantic of course all
numbers involving the US are gigantic
but even as a percentage of GDP we are
going to end up very shortly with debt
that's higher as a ratio of GDP than the
at the end of World War two but
everything we've seen says that advanced
countries that borrow in their own
currency like the United States or Japan
or Britain are able to carry really very
high debt loads without crisis and a lot
of that is because interest rates even
when interest rates aren't as low as
they are now interest rates are
consistently below the growth rate of
the economy which actually means the
debt tends to melt away over time
relative to GDP as long as you aren't
you know massively irresponsible year
after year and yeah probably there must
in principle be some limit but if you
look at the historical record it's very
hard to find it in Japan has debt that's
200 percent of GDP no problems they're
able to borrow very cheaply in fact
negative interest rates in Japan at the
moment Britain yeah we came out of World
War two with debt that was about a
hundred percent of GDP which at the time
people thought was terrible but turns
out to be no problem at all and it just
sort of melted away we never paid that
debt back which is grew out of it
Britain came out of World War two with
debt there was two hundred and seventy
percent of GDP they had no problem
they they grew out of their debt to
about 30 years later it was down to to
just fifty percent of GDP so the if
there is an upper limit I mean with this
almost a philosophical question because
if there is an upper limit it's so far
away from where we are that it should
not be shouldn't bear on our policy
decisions at all right now
yet as you've also said the
the United States can borrow against its
own currency also helpful the new book
is arguing with zombies economics
politics and the fight for a better
future professor Krugman thank you so
much for being with us hope you'll come
back be safe Thanks all right I will do
my best still ahead it's the start of a
new month in several states across the
country are now easing up on coronavirus
restrictions but dr. Anthony foul she
has a warning saying you can't just
leave over things
we'll be right back thanks for checking
out MSNBC on YouTube and make sure you
subscribe to stay up-to-date on the
day's biggest stories and you can click
on any of the videos around us to watch
more four Morning Joe and MSNBC thanks
so much for watching